- Hey, Dan, welcome to the live stream
and almost to the podcast.
- Hi, Michael, thanks for having me.
- Yeah, it's good to have you here.
Super excited to talk about ORMs and stuff.
And before we get too far into it,
folks out there in the live stream,
please put comments in the live chat
if you're watching live,
and we'll try to make that part of the show.
Dan, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
- Yeah, thanks for having me.
I'm a big fan of the show,
So it's kind of like a little dream to be on the show.
- Oh, how nice.
That means a lot.
Thank you.
It's great to have you here
and you've built some really neat software
that I'm looking forward to diving into.
It's interesting because,
I mean, we're gonna talk about your ORM,
but it's also, there's so many different areas
at which now that we're kind of past Python 2
and there's a lot of folks who are saying,
you know what, we can really put Python 2 behind us
and let's just build for the future.
That just opens up so many doors, right?
Like, oh, well, type-ins, of course, type-ins.
Why not type-ins?
Well, Python 2 is why not type-ins, but not anymore, right?
And async and all these other things.
And just, it's really great to have these frameworks
like yours coming along that just go,
modern Python, what can we build now?
- Yeah, I totally agree.
It felt like Python 3.6 kind of closed the door
on the should we still be using Python 2 conversation?
because by that point you had async,
you had type annotations,
data classes I think were Python 3.7, enums.
It just goes on and on.
It just felt like the Python community
knocked out of the park, Python 3.6 and on.
- Yeah, I have a theory that is completely unsubstantiated
that actually a lot of the progress
has to do with f-strings.
So many people are like,
"Ah, I just want to easily format this code.
What do I need?
I need Python 3.6."
Fine, we're going-- - That's true, actually.
- We're gonna switch.
It's such a minor feature, still minor.
- The pain of going back would be horrible.
I couldn't imagine using Python 2 now, actually.
- I know, yeah, same.
Quick welcome to some folks on livestream.
Chris May, hey, happy to see you here.
Paul Everett, so glad you can stop by.
And Teddy as well.
We'll get some questions in from you all, I'm sure.
Now, before we get into Piccolo
and all the cool stuff that I was alluding to there,
let's just start with your story, Dan.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
Yeah, so i've been programming for quite a long time now. I might look quite youthful on this camera
But that's just because my webcam's got a filter on it. But um
The touch up my appearance is checked. Yeah, i've actually been getting yeah program a python for about 14 years
um
So django was kind of one of my first
Frameworks and just really fell in love with it because in university I learned c
And then it's like oh this world of python exists and it's a bit more easier than c
um
And so i've used it extensively since then
I mostly been working for startups
And design agencies and then really fell down the async rabbit hole over the last few years
um, so really enjoy working with web sockets and building kind of interactive front ends and
Also really kind of excited the way that postgres continues to grow and have new features
so yeah, they're the things that really excite me in the python world
Yeah
Those things are super exciting and the web frameworks are coming along to embrace them
The language features, you know async and await, right?
We had async io in python 3.4
But it didn't really gain a ton of adoption because there was it sort of had this callback
Style of working which is not the same as you know, await a thing and just keep rocking
Totally agree. Yeah, so I think they pretty much took what twisted had created and ported it over and like I say, it's all callbacks and
it was still better than it's still good to have that option in the standard library
But I totally agree async await really kind of set it on fire
Um because it was quite hard to approach async iot first
It was you don't have to think about how you write code differently
You just put the awaits in the spots and then you know, everything kind of flows
It's I know it's not the same but from how you think about structuring your code is real similar
yeah, and I think the maturity is there now with the libraries and the standard library and
It feels like you can just dive in and it feels a bit like a no-brainer now to use async
Yeah, I think it is a no-brainer for sure. So
It's interesting that you got into django in the early days because django's
The only the only major web framework that says here's your orm
Here's how you use it as opposed to flask that says do what you want or pyramid that says do what you want
You know, you could use in orm, but you don't have to but django's it's it's part of the culture and the zen of it
Right. Yeah, i'm a big fan of django
I think it's kind of a masterpiece because it's still to test the time so remarkably well
And how you could have written a app 12 years ago and then in an afternoon you could have upgraded it to the latest version
so there's lots to be said for django and
I really like the tight integration. So, i'm one so people tend to prefer one or the other
the kind of the flask route where you can make all of your choices, but I like really tightly integrated solutions where
You come to a problem and then you pretty much know what to pick
yeah, so that's definitely inspired piccolo to some extent
yeah, I I love the
Diversity of technology and libraries and ways of doing things in the python space
But when people come from other
It's a challenge to go, well, here's 20 different ORMs
you could use and seven different web frameworks.
And they're like, I don't want seven.
I want to know what I should be doing.
What should I do?
And so it's a mixed bag.
- I really like that.
But the thing is, if you come from the JavaScript world,
then it's a relief because you've only got 20, not 2000.
- Oh my goodness, this one's seven months old.
It's like ancient.
Can we still use it?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, no, no.
That's a whole different discussion.
The JavaScript churn over there.
- Yeah.
- But yeah, let's focus in on what you built here.
So let's talk about Piccolo.
You used to sell it, you describe it as a fast async ORM
for Python that's easy to learn.
And I think it seems like it really hits
on all those points.
Tell us about it.
Where did it come from?
- So all those terms are like fairly aspirational.
So the fast is because it's built on asyncpg.
So this is a really fast Postgres adapter
that the Magic Stack guys built.
Part of the reason it's so fast is it's written in Cypher.
So it's compiled.
And then there's also a few other features
within Piccolo which kind of help it speed wise,
like frozen queries where it doesn't have to generate
the SQL each time, it kind of caches some of it.
So that's kind of where the fast comes from.
Async. - Oh, nice.
- Async, it supports Async.io.
That was really one of the core reasons for building it
is because I was a Django channels power user
and I had to build a lot of chat applications in my day job.
So for me, async was kind of essential.
And then the easy to learn is called also aspirational.
I've put like as much effort as I possibly can
into the documentation and stuff like that,
but I'll let the readers be the judge of that.
- Yeah, that's in the eye of the beholder, right?
But at the same time, you have done a lot of things
that I don't see others doing.
Like the documentation is good.
Obviously that's pretty standard
on a lot of the different frameworks,
although they can be super intense, right?
Like I love SQLAlchemy, but when I go and read there,
I'm like, okay, here's a 20 page doc.
I better pay attention, turn off my music
and just like not miss something.
On the other hand, but what you are doing
that's pretty unique is you've got like a playground.
You've got a playground for the admin backend.
Oh, by the way, there's an admin backend.
And you've got a playground for trying out queries
and stuff like that, right?
That's pretty unique.
- Yeah, so I was really excited by the playground concept.
So it's something I borrowed from the Swift world
and because Apple is trying to make Swift accessible
Newcomers, they have this concept of a playground which is basically a pre-populated chunk of code and then you can just um
Play around with it as kind of the name implies
So I use ipython to achieve it. So a lot of people know ipython
Just running it on the command line like a terminal, but you can actually embed it within your python code
So the way the playgrounds work is it creates a sqlite database. It loads an example schema
Populates it with data and then basically launches the up hyphen shell. Um
so you basically have all of that set up because
One of the problems with learning and learning an orm is the barrier is huge when you think about it for a newcomer
You have to set up a database you have to understand schemas and migrations and running them and populating data
So I just wanted to say look i'm going to shortcut all of that
You install piccolo you do piccolo playground run
and then you've got an example schema, and then you can actually follow along with the documentation.
So whenever there's a example query in the piccolo docs, you can actually run it in the playground,
and you should see the results. So yeah, I was quite excited about that.
I like it a lot. And you're right that it is challenging. You know, as we build up experience,
we get used to it. It's like, oh, yeah, you just you fire up the database server, and then you
connect to it, then you do this thing. But how do you get the database server installed? What if you
you have the wrong version? What if it requires authentication?
What if there's a firewall? Just like there's layers and layers of places
where people get sheared off. Like, "Ah, this doesn't work for me."
Right? And so keeping that simple is great.
And I think I just want to give a shout out to SQLite,
because what you just said is such a good example of,
you're probably going to run this against Postgres or something like that.
Yeah.
But for the little example, you don't need that.
You can just use SQLite. And it's so nice that that's a serverless
in the sense that it's just embedded,
doesn't require a separate process to run or connect to.
It already comes with Python, generally speaking.
It's really nice.
Yeah, I totally agree.
And that's the reason for SQLite support within Piccolo,
because as you said, no one's going to run it in production.
But then it's just that frictionless setup,
which is so great.
Like, using SQLite asynchronously doesn't really make a lot of sense
because you don't really have any network lag talking to the database.
But it's great to have it in there for convenience.
- Yeah, it is.
I suspect there may be some people who run it
in production in like an early, early prototype stage.
They're just wanting to get something up
and here let's just put it up on,
you know, on some hosting place
and just check it out real quick
and then we'll go from there.
- Yeah, one thing that's quite nice is
I used to do this in the design agency.
We'd use SQLite for the prototype
and then you could rsync it down to your local machine.
So you didn't have to do a database dump and reload it.
You could literally just rsync the file.
- Yeah.
- So there are a bunch of conveniences
of SQLite for sure.
- Yeah, it's all gets to be too much data
or really you want sort of too much concurrency
or multi-machines scale out and all that sort of stuff.
So it's not the final destination,
but I do think it's a really interesting
and important starting ground there.
- Yeah, for sure.
- Yeah.
So I gave a shout out to two ORMs already,
the Django one and SQLAlchemy.
And I feel like those are probably the two big hitters
of the Python space, although there are many, many more.
So why not just use those?
Like why go and create Piccolo?
- Yeah, so when I started it,
there was no async options for ORMs at all.
It was all like very new.
And my day job involved async programming all of the time
because of chat apps, online games, that kind of stuff.
So that was really why I was like,
well, nothing really served my needs at the time.
- Right, because until recently,
SQLAlchemy had no async capabilities.
- Yeah.
- And Django or more or less still doesn't, right?
That's the final part that they're trying to move to async.
- Yeah, so the workaround is to run it in a thread,
but it's just not as performant
as running with async.io directly.
So there's kind of this vacuum for a time with async ORMs,
but then it was also about just starting
through a blank sheet of paper and thinking,
look, we've got all these great tools to work with now
Python 3.6 and onwards, how can I absolutely push them to the limit?
So the syntax, it uses a lot of direct references to objects rather than strings.
So for example, in Django, you do my table.object and then .filter and name equals Dan.
The problem with that is you can quite easily make a mistake
as the code changes.
So you might end up having a column which no longer exists.
So strings can be a little bit fragile.
So with Piccolo, it's just object references everywhere.
So rather than name, in this example here,
it's band.name where band is the name of the table.
- Right, so like many of the ORMs,
it's sort of class OOP based, right?
to create a class that maps to a table and database, right?
- Yeah, so there's one distinction
I'd like to make quickly as well.
So there's ORMs and then there's query builders.
And in Python, there's not really too much of a distinction,
but in other languages like JavaScript,
query builders are really popular
as like a separate idea to ORMs.
And query builders, they kind of,
you create a SQL query, you execute it on the database,
and then you tend to work more with dictionaries and lists
rather than objects.
So I'd say that 90% of piccolo is a query builder.
But people are used to ORMs and Python.
And it can actually lead you to some quite poor patterns
ORMs because what the first thing people learn with Django
is they'll go my table.objects.get.
So it returns an object and then they'll change
the attributes of the object and then they'll call save.
But then that's actually two database queries
'cause you have to get it and then you have to update it.
- And it's not just two database queries.
It can be a lot of serialization.
Like the slowest part of all of my data stack
is if I were to try to pull back 10,000 records at a time,
it's the deserialization of those 10,000 things
that is actually the slowest part of the entire process.
And here, if what you're talking about,
like you're talking about the band,
if the band has tons of information
and you just want to change the name, right?
You're pulling all that data back,
converting it or whatever, then changing the thing
and then pushing it back down.
Yeah, it's a lot of work.
- Yeah, and a lot of the time what'll happen
is you'll serialize it into an object
and then you'll deserialize it out into JSON anyway
and you kind of, it's kind of pointless
when you think about it.
And there's also the problem with objects getting stale.
So you might pull an object into memory,
but then some other user might manipulate all those objects.
But then when you save it, are you gonna overwrite
those fields that have been updated in the database?
So it's problematic in a way.
So it is an ORM, but then I'd really encourage people
to look at it as a query builder too,
because in my own apps, I use the select method a lot.
So rather than returning the objects,
it returns dictionaries,
and then it has this option, an output method.
So you can just literally deserialize it
straight into JSON.
So this is what makes it fast
because the query is going through async-pg,
which is super fast,
and then it's coming back as a dictionary
straight from async-pg,
and then it's using all JSON to stick it
straight into a string.
So you're kind of missing,
you're skipping all this deserialization nonsense.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
This is super interesting.
Now that you pointed out,
I'm not used to seeing projections in ORMs.
What I'm used to seeing is,
give me back the classes that in this case, a band, right?
Do a query like where the popular is greater than 100
or whatever, and give me a whole bunch of bands,
and then I'm gonna work with them.
But sometimes, like the one I work with most commonly
is Mongo engine, which I know is not an ORM, it's an ODM,
but close enough, does the serialization bit.
And you can say, I don't really want the other parts,
just give me the name and like the website or something.
And it won't ship or deserialize those things,
but you just end up with the same objects
that just have none everywhere else, right?
Where in your ORM, you can actually say,
you can actually say band.select, band.name,
band.url or something like that.
And that would return the dictionary
with those two things, right?
A list of dictionaries, probably?
- A list of dictionaries, yeah.
And then it also has a feature,
like Django has this feature which is invaluable.
It's called values list.
And so if you just want one value back,
it'll then condense it down to just a list of values.
- I want all the IDs of the bands
that play pop music or something.
- Yeah, and it's so much more efficient than doing like
in Django, you know, found the objects,
the all and then looping through to get the IDs.
It's just these little tricks you learn.
Like if you're Django for ages,
you just learn these little tricks.
- Right, another one that stood out to me
is the ability to do set-based operations.
'Cause when I think of ORMs, I, just for everyone listening,
I adore ORMs.
I think they're really empowering for people.
I think they take a lot of the modern tooling
that we love, like refactoring and allow you to apply that
like over to your query, because if you wanted to like
change the casing of band.name, you could refactor,
rename that and it would affect your queries
'cause that's still Python code, right?
That said, there are places where people either abuse it
or it's just inappropriate.
So the places where it gets abused a lot
would be the N plus one problem, right?
Where you've got a lazy reference to something else
And you don't know that that's gonna be a separate query
for every time you touch one of those.
And you get a list of objects back and you loop over them
and you access like in your example,
you got band.manager for being band, band.manager, right?
That could be 101 queries
for what should have been one, right?
- Yeah, that's a really good point.
And even experienced developers get this wrong
because they might use serializers,
which are calling properties under the hood on the table,
which are triggering SQL queries.
So this is another design intent behind Piccolo
is whenever a query is run, it's very explicit.
You're literally calling dot run,
- Right. - Or dot run sync.
So there's none of this magic.
You can't accidentally create an N plus one query.
- You might accidentally end up
with a co-routine or something.
- Yeah.
So yeah, it's a really good point
'cause I think N plus one is kind of like the scourge
of developers with performance.
And also coming back to your point about ORMs,
as a backend developer,
you can spend hours a day using ORMs.
It's kind of like one of the main tools in our tool belt.
So it's kind of quite nice to start from a blank sheet
of paper and think, how can I make that experience
maybe like slightly better if I can.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So the N plus one problem, I believe is a,
either there's some tool doing something
behind the scenes you don't know,
but often it's just a lack of understanding.
Oh, that actually is a lazily loaded property,
which is gonna trip your query.
So I should have put a join
and then I'd be in a better place.
Right, like that's a programmer thing
that you should pay attention to and work with.
The one where I don't know how to fix it
is more like the serialization thing.
Like what if I want to go through my database
and go to 10,000 records and make some changes to them?
So often it's do the query, loop over the 10,000 things
and make a change, call save.
Maybe it's in one giant transaction
that you finally push the changes back.
but you're pulling all the data back.
And one of the things I really like about your,
or I'm here is like this update section here
where you can do set based operations
without pulling the records back.
- Yeah, so you can do stuff like,
so this example here,
weight band.update, band.popularity 10,000,
but then you can also do band.popularity
is band.popularity plus 10.
And then in the database,
it will then just add 10 to all of the numbers.
- Oh really?
That's awesome. - Yeah.
And then it's all just magic around,
you know, Python magic methods.
It's just, as a library offer, it gives you so much power.
It's one of the things I love about Python.
'Cause when you're building like query languages,
like ORMs, I think very few languages
can really rival Python with its flexibility.
- Yeah.
That's really why a lot of this stuff's possible.
It's really neat. And I think
the ability to push these changes without actually...
You're still programming in the ORM classes in the model,
but you're not actually pushing a whole bunch of them back and forth
to make the changes, but to do these set-based operations,
like delete them where, or make this update
to this value where this is true, and then just push that,
make that happen in the best way you can with SQL, right?
Yeah, exactly. I think going back to your point around the n plus one, I think
properties are something that can be a little bit evil and
i've really
shy away from them in the piccolo code because
It can you call the property and you think you're getting a value back, but it could be doing any kind of magic
and then
Once you've defined something as a property, you then can't add arguments to it without breaking your api
um
So yeah, I think that's something i've tried to steer away from in general with piccolo like properties. Yeah
It's a lot of a lot of hidden stuff happening there, right? Yeah. Yeah, it's not entirely clear. I think they're super useful but
certainly in something where
I thought I was accessing a field of the class
But what I actually did is make a network call like that
Distinction is possibly too big of a bridge to just make that automatic a lot of the times
Yeah, there's no async properties in python as well. So that's kind of one of the reasons why
It doesn't use any async properties.
Maybe if they add it, maybe I'll put a comment on the PEP saying, "Don't do it."
Yeah, exactly.
Another thing that's interesting here is an alt code,
every code you've written is await band.select or await band.delete and so on or update.
And then at the end you say run.
This is the explicit part that you were talking about in your API.
Like I know here's where it's happening.
And it probably makes a lot of sense to do that as well
because on the flip side of it,
that's where you have to await it anyway, right?
Yeah, so what happens is you build up this query,
you just chain methods to it,
and then at any point you can print out that object,
and I'll give you the SQL.
- Oh, nice. - Yeah.
And then until you actually await it...
So there's something under the hood that I don't really publicize.
You don't need the .run.
If you await it, it will run as a convenience because people forget.
But then it just makes it easier from a documentation perspective to say when it's async use run and when it's synchronous use run sync
um
right
but and if you do run sync then um
i've got like a bit of magic in there where
it tries to
Create an event loop to run it or it tries to figure out if there's already an event loop if there is run it in there
so you you can use piccolo in an old school
WSGI app if you wanted to just synchronously.
- Yeah, well, let's dive into that
because that's one of the things that really stood out to me.
Many frameworks or APIs packages tell you
you're gonna either have to go,
you're gonna take a fork in the road,
you're gonna go down the async fork
and you're gonna use the async library like HTTPX
or you're gonna go on another fork
and you're gonna use the request library that has no async
and you're gonna go down that path
and you choose and you just go.
And with Piccolo, you can actually run,
I guess the default behavior would be to be async and await,
but it has this .run async,
which will kind of cap where the asynchronous behaves
and goes, and it'll just,
you could run it in a regular Flask app
or Django app or whatever,
and not worry about it being async at all, right?
- Yeah, that's right.
And it's actually one of the design challenges
with Piccolo is how do you create an API
which is synchronous and asynchronous?
And there's only really two ways of achieving it.
It's with a method like run or run sync
or with context managers.
So some of them you'll create
either an async context manager or synchronous.
And then that'll then impact
whether the underlying query is synchronous or not.
But then it adds a little bit more boilerplate
if every time you run a query,
you need a context manager to tell it to be async.
So this was kind of the best outcome I could think of
which just have .run or .runsync.
- I think this is great, especially since even
if you forget the run, it'll still run async,
but there's a way to kind of cap it.
So something I wanted to talk about,
it's driven me crazy ever since async and await
were introduced because I don't find it to be true,
but I hear it all the time spoken about in the community
is async and await, they're super neat,
but they're like viruses.
And in the sense that soon as like one of your functions
way, way at the bottom has to do something async.
Well, then the thing that calls it has to be async
and await it.
And the things that call that function now
all have to await it.
And that percolates all the way at the top of your app.
And so now you've, by using any async library,
you've turned your entire thing into this like
async vertical call stack, right?
And, and what your example here shows that that's not,
it doesn't have to be that way, right?
That's sort of the naive,
I'm just gonna like write the code without thinking about it.
But if you want to say, have your data access layer
do three things,
'cause it's got to pull up some stuff from different places,
you want that to be async,
it doesn't mean that function has to be async.
It could just start its own event loop,
do the three things faster than without it,
and then return the answers, right?
You can kind of cap it at any level that you want.
And your run sync is kind of an example of that.
Like you can choose to not have it
just turn your entire app async.
- Yeah, you can jump between them.
So typically if people use an async,
then it's like, the argument is,
if you need async, your whole app probably should be async
because otherwise why use an async?
But then you can flip between them quite easily.
So if you've got a synchronous app
and you wanna call some async code,
there's asyncio.run.
And you can also do stuff like spin up an event loop
in a different thread and then send work to that.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- So it is quite fluid.
You can flip between them quite easily.
- Yeah, I mean, just one example that comes to mind
is what if I wanted to go web scrape every page
at a certain domain?
So I've got a function that gives me a domain,
I give it a domain, and then I want it to return
or store into the database all the pages.
That would be perfectly reasonable to have that thing go,
okay, well, let's do a request,
figure out what all the pages are,
and then just recursively sort of grab them
all asynchronously.
You would get a huge boost
on getting every page off a site,
even if that function blocked, you know what I mean?
'Cause it itself could just go crazy against the server.
Maybe it shouldn't, but it could.
- Yeah, I'm a huge fan of asyncio.gather as well.
So that's a really like beautiful API just for saying,
do these 50 things now, please.
And let me know when you're done.
- Yeah, and block, right?
When you're done, give me a list of answers or errors.
- Yeah.
- Also on the live stream, Chris May, hey Chris,
says, "I'm so excited to use Piccolo with Unsync.
"I have a workflow that'd be nice to parallelize."
And yeah, so I think Unsync is another
really interesting library that wraps up async.io
plus threading plus multi-processing,
but then gives you a nice way to cap it as well
'cause you can go, like, be given a task
that comes back from there.
If you just ask for the result and it's not done,
it'll just block like a regular thing.
And it does kind of what you're talking about.
it has a background thread with its own event loop
and it just pushes all the work over to there.
Yeah, so, yeah, pretty neat.
- That's a cool library.
- Yeah, it is, at least for the size, right?
Like 126 lines and it unifies those three APIs
and adds some more stuff.
That's pretty big bang for the Python byte there.
- Yeah, that's impressive.
I wish Piccolo was not to us.
I think it's thousands, tens of thousands of lines by now.
- Yeah, yeah.
- So another one of the new Python 3.6 onward type of things
that's really cool is the type annotations.
- Yeah, I love type annotations.
So part of my job in the past was using Swift
and Swift is almost like Python's brother or sister.
It was very heavily inspired by Python.
- Right, it's like if Python all of a sudden decided
it was incredibly strict about typing and type definitions.
- Yeah.
- That would be a lot like Swift, right?
compiled. Yeah, but it's a combination of type annotations and the tooling to support it
So in python's case, it's vs code and in swift's case
It's xcode and it just means that when you're refactoring it just makes it so much more confident about what's going on
um, it provides documentation because
Previously people were putting in a doc string anyway, so why not put it in your function definition and then you can introspect it
and my pi is incredibly powerful. I I honestly don't think I could have built piccola without type annotations
Because it makes your code so much more maintainable
The click to go to VS Code as well is just a beautiful usability improvement
And then, kind of one of the hidden benefits is it makes tab completion so good
So a lot of Python auto completions, they use a library called Jedi under the hood
So when I was building Piccolo, I had to look at the source code to try and figure out how it does its magic
And if you give a type annotation to something like,
this is what this function returns,
it's a really strong indicator to Jedi that,
you know, this is what's gonna get returned.
I don't need to do any magic anymore.
And so-- - I would say that half the time,
that's why I do it is to make the editor better.
So both VS Code and PyCharm,
like take a good look at what the type annotations are.
- Yeah. - Right?
You can just say, oh, you're trying to pass a string
and that's really supposed to be an integer.
But then also like you say, tab completion
or autocomplete all over the place is fantastic.
- Yeah, I think that's a distinction as well
where I think if you're building an application,
let's say you're building a Django app or a Flask app,
you don't need to care quite as much.
Like I personally would still have type annotations,
but for libraries, I think it's just absolutely essential.
Like I don't think any new Python library
should be written without it
because you're kind of shortchanging your users in a way
'cause their editor experience is so much worse.
- Yeah, in the Flask app, for example, that you've mentioned,
I would say on the boundaries, right?
Like here's a data access layer,
like put type annotations on those little bits there.
And then the rest of the app,
usually the editors and the tools will just pick it up
and continue to tell you what you're working with.
- Yeah.
- But if you're doing a library, right,
you want every function or every class
to be kind of standalone and know everything it can.
- Yeah, definitely.
And one more thing about type annotations
is it's probably the greatest source
of interview questions ever made
because you can ask people in an interview,
What's the difference between like a sequence
and an iterable?
And like when you use type annotations,
you really start to think about what's going on.
And it's a great learning experience too.
- I wanna pass a generator here,
but it takes a list of things and it says that won't work.
Maybe you just need to relax your type annotations
to an iterator.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, that kind of thing.
Quick question from Roller out there on livestream.
Hey Roller, can I just pick a level and place a Mongo engine
or is it just for a relational stuff?
- Yeah, it's just relational and it's,
you can use SQLite locally, but it's mostly Postgres.
It was really built to take advantage of Postgres
because Postgres is,
it's like the fastest growing SQL database in the world,
which is remarkable to think it's how old it is.
And I think I'll, you know,
I think adding other SQL databases would be quite easy,
but adding something like Mongo would be a bit trickier.
I wouldn't say it was impossible, but a bit more work.
Yeah, I would think so. Yeah, it's not certainly not impossible, but like joined and stuff would get tricky. What about
SQL injection, I mean many of us have heard about the little Bobby tables XKCD, which is
delightful, you know, yeah, you know sort of
Schadenfreude a sort of way
we all kind of sort of relish in somebody else suffering this but I
I find that this is actually one of the really nice things about orms most of the time is that they scrape off
The ability to do sql injection because you're not building the sql
Yeah, definitely. So, um
Your database adapter so something like async pg or psycho pg in the synchronous world
What you want to do is you want to pass it the query string with placeholders for any user
Submitted values and then you submit the values that separately like in a list
um
And it sounds like a parameterized query basically. Yeah. Yeah, and as long as you do that you're safe. but then
for a library
When people are programmatically creating very complex equal queries
and then
You need to try and make sure that you've got the right values that match the right placeholders to pass to the adapter
It is quite challenging. There's some like recursive code where it has to so we use some called query strings internally within piccolo
So it never concatenates strings for sql statements
It just it uses query strings and then it compiles them before sending it to the database adapter
And it basically looks through all of the sub query strings
It might have if it's a really complex query and then it kind of passes it to the adapter
um, but yeah
- Yeah, it's just one of the complex things
about building ORMs for sure.
And also one of the most dangerous to get wrong.
- Yeah, yeah, it absolutely is.
There's untold number of bad things
that can happen with SQL injection.
And it's so easy.
All you have to do is put a single little tick
to comment out stuff,
semi-colon to finish the statement,
and then you can run arbitrary code.
And a lot of times you can even,
some database engines will let you run
sub-process type things, which is even worse, but yeah.
It's not good, so you definitely wanna avoid it.
- Yeah, it's a good argument for using ORMs
and query builders because it'll make it less likely.
- Yeah, I think for sure.
You know, another thing that I wanted to touch on
a little bit here is the actual filtering
or projection statement type bits.
So I mentioned using Mongo engine before,
which I'm a big fan of, and it's basically a Mongo equivalent of that Django ORM.
So in that regard, they're real similar.
And you do things like if I wanted to say where the band popularity,
or let's say the band name is Pythonistas, right?
You would just say name equals Pythonistas as part of the filter.
And there's two things that are crummy about that.
One is you get no autocomplete that there's a column called name
because it's not, it doesn't really know what class,
even though you started out, like band.objects,
it doesn't, in the filter part,
it no longer knows that the name came from the band, right?
That's not part of the language.
And then the other one is you're doing an equals,
or you've got like weird operators,
like in the name, like name__gt for greater than
and stuff like that.
Whereas yours, you just write what you would put
into an if statement or a loop or something like that.
So you would say like band out popularity less than 1000.
That's the thing you send in there.
- Yeah, that's right.
So I've been caught up,
tripped up so many times in the past with Django
where I've had something like name double underscore
something else.
And then it can't really understand that's wrong
like a linter or while you're coding
it only really knows that a runtime
and then you've got a 500 error.
So the idea here is a linter would be able
to pick up these problems.
- Exactly, because so much of the pieces are,
they're just using star star KW args,
and then they figure out how to generate a query
out of like looking for special keywords in the key names
and then turning those to columns.
Also the refactoring thing, right?
The linters and if I wanna do a refactoring
to rename popularity,
it's not gonna check popularity_gt as a keyword argument.
It has no idea those are related
Yeah, yeah, definitely
um, so the way it's implemented this the double equals and
All these operators is this is one of the amazing things about python is how you can just overload
Like fundamental things about the language so you can overload what?
addition means
And when someone first tells you that it sounds like the most mental thing in the world because why would you want one plus one?
To equal five for then it turns out when you're building an orm. It's it's golden
And this is one reason why I find Python
just so compelling over and over again,
is because as a library author, you can do this stuff
that you can get closer to more of like a DSL
than like a--
- Like domain specific language, yeah, absolutely.
- Yeah.
- So is this be done with descriptors or what's the magic?
- So for the less than, there's like double underscore LT
and you can override that.
And then what happens is when you call that method,
it returns a where object.
And then you can also do in brackets,
band.popularity less than 1000,
and then double and sign as well,
band.popularity greater than 500.
So you can combine them with and and or statements.
So the where statements in Piccolo can get really powerful.
But yeah, it's just--
- You just have to teach the where clauses how to and,
and then structure it in a way that Python
will let it kind of go through, right?
- Yeah, or you can do .where, put some stuff in,
and then another .where statement.
If you've got multiple where statements,
it becomes like it's an and.
- Yeah, yeah.
- But yeah, it's just all Python magic,
which is one of the reasons I love Python.
- Yeah, speaking of overridden things,
the thing that I think is the most insane,
that I'm starting to love, but took a while to get used to,
is the way the path object works for defining paths.
The forward slash often means like drive separation
on the POSIX systems and it's close enough.
You could actually put forward slash in your strings
in Python on Windows and it'll still like,
okay, fine, backslash is what you meant.
So they overrode the divide operator in code
to allow you to concatenate strings and paths together.
And that's just crazy.
- Yeah, the first time I saw it, I was very confused,
but when you understand it, it's okay, but yeah, totally.
- Yeah, I've gotten okay with it as well,
and I start to use it, and I really like it now,
but I was like, I don't know if I can get behind.
This is a bridge too far.
This is, that's division.
What are we doing here?
No, it's cool, it's cool.
- Talking of magic, to Piccolo,
like all ORMs, it uses metaclasses a lot,
and there's something that got added in,
I don't know if it's Python 3.7 or 3.6,
but they actually changed metaclasses slightly,
So there's now like a thunder magic method called in its subclass
and piccolo uses this a lot and it's it's actually an amazing hidden feature of
Python where you can now add keyword arguments to a class definition
So if you had class foo open brackets inherits from bar
Comma and then you can start adding keyword arguments to the class to customize its creation
And that that's kind of like a new
layer of magic that's been added
to python recently and
Piccolo uses it extensively, but I don't see many other libraries using it yet because it's probably not so well known
But yeah, just kind of spread that bit of magic. So hopefully people can use it too. Nice. Yeah, that sounds awesome
I can certainly see how and like trying to create
The classes like the band class or whatever you say that it's going to be
Would definitely use that so one of the things that you say is awesome about piccolo is the batteries included
Yeah, so let's talk about some of the batteries. So
yeah, so the main battery by far is the admin because when I started it I was working for a design agency and
Admins are incredibly important for design agencies because you want to put something in front of a customer
That they like the look of and they're comfortable using
um, so this is a huge part of the effort that's gone into piccolo and
um
So this is a it's just a project called piccolo admin
And what happens is it's it's an ascii app so I can maybe go into more detail about ascii later on but
All you do is you give it a list of piccolo tables and then it uses
Pydantic so pydantic is a serialization library and
It basically creates a pydantic model from the piccolo table and then pydantic models have this really useful method
Where it's json schema and it creates a json schema for the pydantic model
So right because the buy tender classes know this field is an end. This one is an optional date time and so on
Yeah, so picola has really good pedantic support, but it's in a sister repo called piccolo api
and then that so that creates the Pydantic model and it also has something called piccolo crud, so you give it a
piccolo table and it creates
Another ascii app which has got all of the crud operations for your database. So
You can programmatically create this huge api just by giving it a few tables
And then the front end is written in vue js and it's completely decoupled from the back end. It's just all by api
um
so yeah, i'm a huge fan of ujs because it's it's very natural for python developers who used to
Template syntax in django and flask if you looked at the view templates you'd be like this looks very familiar
So yeah, i'm a big fan of that. Nice
Yeah, I think it's super close to chameleon because the attribute driven
Behavior as well. Yeah
Yeah
But then like to make a working admin requires so much work because you've also got the security side
So piccolo API has a bunch of really useful asking middleware and it has like session authentication
Csrf protection and rate limiting as well because you don't want people to spam the login
um, so like just to get a fairly simple admin is
In it's like a iceberg
Um to do it properly
So yeah, a lot of effort's gone into the admin. but i'm really proud of it and
Like this is really what excites me more than anything about the future because as we add support for post GIS and stuff like that
Being able to create really interesting widgets around data. So, you know, how could I design?
a rectangle field for post gis or
I could see some really cool stuff that
Are sort of template extensions, you know, like let's just pick Jinja for example
Like if you had one of these objects you could pass it over and it knew
For example, here's a daytime. You could just say make a calendar picker
Here and it just you know, as long as you have the javascript included
Instead of just putting the text it gives you like a nice little ajax widget
or
These this list goes on a map drop in the map widget and off it goes
Yeah
so basically pickler admin. It's just it's just turns pydantic models into ui
And it's actually quite interesting.
And I'd love to get it to the point where
for a business app, you just use Piccolo Admin.
You don't even have to build UI.
You just say, here are my tables.
- Yeah.
- And then, yeah.
- Well, the truth is so often,
like there's a lot of these little internal apps
that people build that are just like forms over data.
I just need to see the details, click on one,
edit it, create a new one and delete one.
And like, that's the app I need for this table.
Could you build that, right?
- Yeah, for sure.
- It is a lot of it.
'Cause I think with the approach I took to Piccolo
is you have a lot of Python libraries
and they kind of start from the outside in.
So they start from the URL layer
and then the views and like middleware.
And then over time they then add the data layer
and the security.
But then with Piccolo it's kind of from the inside out,
like I started from the data layer
and then have the admin and some middleware.
So it's quite a nice companion to a Veraski app.
So just kind of pick the framework you like
and then Piccolo kind of gives you the data layer
in the admin, that's kind of.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, let's talk about the ASCII stuff a little bit
'cause you did mention that there's some interesting support
for those things and it's got like to some degree,
native FastAPI, Flask and even Black Sheep,
which is an interesting one,
support for those frameworks, right?
- Yeah, so I'm a huge fan of ASCII
'cause I was a Django channels power user
and Andrew Godwin created ASCII out of Django channels.
And it's really like a beautiful thing.
So Starlette was the one that really built the foundation.
So this is an async library,
but also kind of like a framework.
Like you can build an app with Starlet
or you can use it to build up frameworks.
But what's amazing about ASCII is like every component
in an ASCII framework is ASCII.
So ASCII is basically the spec where it's a function
that accepts a scope, a send and a receive.
And then if you look at the internals of Starlet,
everything's ASCII, like the middleware's ASCII,
the endpoints are ASCII, like the whole thing.
And it's like super composable.
So you can say, I've got an ASCII app
and you can mount other ASCII apps within it.
So this is what I love about ASCII as a spec.
So you can say, take a FastAPI app or a Starlette app
and include Piccolo admin, same with black sheep.
- You could say slash catalog is actually handled
by this other app written in FastAPI
where the main thing is written in flask
or something like that.
And you just kind of click them together in that cool way.
Maybe core, it would have to be the one, but still.
- Yeah, and I really loved that as it's quite exciting
that you could kind of build an app
with multiple frameworks and be like, well,
this part of the app will be better served by FastAPI,
but this bit, I just need style,
to I want black sheep or whichever ASCII framework
people can dream up.
So I think it's really exciting for the Python community,
the ASCII spec.
- Yeah, and we did talk a little bit about the challenges
and the cascading effect of async and await.
But if you're already running a framework
that has async view methods,
there's just nothing to it, right?
You just write your code and you just await the bits
you gotta await in the view method
and it just, the server and the framework
handle the vent loops and all that business.
- Yeah, I think as well, what kind of happened
is asyncIO came out and it doesn't directly affect speed.
It's more about throughput,
but it's like the Python community took it as a challenge
to build faster frameworks.
And so there's a lot of them have really quite fast
internals and they do feel quite cutting edge.
- Yeah, like uv loop and stuff like that.
They're like, how can we do this,
but have the minimal overhead of adding this.
I mean, people do talk about,
okay, async and await won't make your code go faster.
Well, it won't make CPU code go faster,
but so often what we're doing,
especially in web apps is waiting.
I wanna wait on a database and then wait on the network,
and then I wanna wait on the database again,
and then I'm gonna wait on an API,
and then I'm gonna send back three lines of JSON, right?
Like 99.9% of that is just waiting on something else.
And when you're using async and await,
like you can just do other things
while you're doing that 99% of waiting.
- Yeah, so usually if you do a database query,
it takes a few milliseconds.
But then if you use the time it module in Python
and you see how long basic operations take,
they're more like microseconds.
So there's like orders of magnitude difference
in how long a database query takes to basic Python stuff.
But this is why having stuff like uv loops
are really important because if you had a really slow
event loop, it kind of wouldn't make much difference
because the event loops fast as well.
And like a lot of the projects I did in the past,
So Fruitport's really important because some apps,
you won't have a lot of traffic
and then all of a sudden you'll get a thousand users.
So I was doing like live events
and you'd get a thousand people at once.
And in that situation,
Fruitport is incredibly important.
- Right.
I mean, look at how the whole healthcare rollout
in 2008 went, right?
I just can't help but think
there must've been more awaits available
to those frameworks and those web apps
'cause they just kept crashing and stuff was timing out
And I'm sure it's just like, well,
we're just gonna wait on this other slow government API
and we're gonna do that for a lot of people
and it's just gonna overwhelm it, right?
It's just, it's crazy.
- It just feels natural because like in the web server world
you have Apache and a lot of people move to Nginx
'cause that's very similar.
It's like event loop driven
and we've kind of seen how beneficial Nginx was.
So it just makes perfect sense to build your backend
in the same way.
- Yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
All right, a couple more things.
we got some time to talk about over here,
you've got a Django comparison page,
which I guess also could be slightly
a Mongo engine comparison page,
'cause like I said, they're basically the same thing
without the nesting.
So if somebody's familiar with Django
and they're like, I would like to consider using this
for my framework or for part of my code or whatever,
just like wanna use it,
but they already know how to do stuff in Django,
you have like, well, here's how you would create an object
And save it in the different frameworks.
Here's how you would update an object
and make changes and so on.
And you can just go through one at a time
and just sort of compare the different pieces, right?
- Yeah, so it's quite heavily inspired by Django,
but then I think Django and its ORM, it's more Pythonic.
So rather than using where, it uses filter.
But then with Piccolo,
it's meant to be very, very close to SQL.
'Cause the theory is, if you know SQL,
it'll be super easy to learn.
And when you do need to drop down to a SQL query,
there's no like mismatch.
You just like, well, I'm always sort of working
in a SQL mindset.
But there are a lot of similarities with Django still.
Like I think people could pick it up quite quickly.
- Yeah, I agree.
Like instead of object that values list,
you have a select projection
or instead of filter you have a where,
but it's honestly not a huge mental jump to make.
- Yeah, and Piccolo also takes like huge inspiration
from Django migrations, which I think is kind of like
the gold standard of migrations in any language.
So a lot of that's going into that.
- Yeah, and one of the batteries
that you were kind of touching on, right,
is the migrations bit.
- Yeah, well, it's, migrations are incredibly hard
to do right.
I think the Django way is--
- I can only imagine.
I don't even wanna try to imagine writing that
'cause it seems really hard.
- Yeah, so the way Django does it
is it looks at your tables
and then it creates a migration file.
And then it then adds up the migration files
to build a picture of what the schema looks like.
And then that's how it then creates subsequent migrations
by doing a diff.
And that's what--
- I've gotta go from this level to that level.
So here's the five migrations to basically use in order.
- Yeah.
And then you've gotta do code generation as well.
So like with Piccolo,
it has to actually create a Python file.
And that's harder than what it seems,
I'm actually writing a Python file,
but if you look at the Piccolo migrations,
they're actually really,
they look like quite beautiful Python code.
And there's a little trick I use internally.
I use like the black formatter on it
before I write out the auto-generated code.
- Oh, that's cool.
So your generated code is pep8 and all the goodness.
- Yeah, so if you look at it--
- That's clever, actually.
Yeah, that's really clever.
- Yeah, it's called black.
- Yeah, I feel like other frameworks,
like for example, the cookie cutter stuff,
you know, you're just generating code files like crazy.
I feel like you could apply that same technique
is after we inject all the user entered values,
let's just do a quick format on them and then drop them.
- Yeah, it makes sense 'cause otherwise
you'll run your linters on your project
and they'll fail 'cause your migrations
aren't correctly formatted.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, that's cool.
A quick question from Teddy out in the live stream says,
I don't use ORMs much in my day to day.
What are good use cases besides web apps for them
and where does Piccolo perform better?
So two questions.
- So I think that data science is obviously a big bit.
So another reason for building Piccolo is data science
is so much on the ascendancy in the Python world.
And people are just still dealing with databases
on a day-to-day basis.
So you can use it in a script if you like.
Then there's maybe a couple of examples in the docs
where you might be scraping some data from a website
and then you just need to stick it into Postgres.
So that would be another good example for using Piccolo.
- Yeah, that is a good example.
- And then where it performs better,
it's really where you need the async
or you might still want a web app component,
even if it's just like a data science script,
you still might want an admin screen to view that data.
- Yeah, I think that performs better.
you could maybe break it into two pieces.
Where does Piccolo perform better?
And I think the async stuff is really important there,
like you say.
And then where does an ORM perform better?
You know, when you talk about performance
and getting stuff done,
like sometimes it's how fast does the code run,
but sometimes it's how fast do I get the final thing built?
Right?
And I think ORMs,
even if they're not always the most efficient way,
sometimes they're really efficient, but not always.
But, you know, they could help you
Safely get to the other side, especially if you don't know sql super well
Yeah, they hold your hand a little bit
Yeah, I created this while working at a design agency and speed's really important design agency
not really execution speed in terms of sql queries, but in terms of scaffolding an app and
being productive
um, so there's so piccolo has something called piccolo asking you and then if you use that command it'll basically scaffold your web app, so
It supports fast api starlet and black sheep
Yeah, that's really cool. So yeah, it's, you just kind of create your starter code and your starter structure from that, right?
Yeah, so a bit like with Django, where you, you know, you create a project on the command line, but with Piccolo, you get an option of different ASCII frameworks. And over time, I'd like to add, you know, way more because there's this, there's many more exciting ASCII frameworks like Quartz, Sanic, Django itself is actually an ASCII app, so it could support Django.
- Yeah, Django's coming along there.
So if people were out there listening
and their favorite framework wasn't listed
in one of those three, or wasn't one of those three,
PRs are accepted, I guess, and they could integrate
their favorite Sanic or whatever they're after.
- Yeah, definitely.
Any feedback's really appreciated.
So the community's definitely helped me a lot with Piccolo,
just as much as trying it and giving feedback,
or obviously pull requests are also really valued.
Even if you just wanna raise an issue to say,
"Why the hell did you do this?"
Like that, you know?
That's still welcome.
- Yeah, awesome.
Cool, well, maybe that's a good place to talk about
where things are going in the future
and kind of wrap up our conversation a bit.
- Yeah, so I feel like I'll never be bored with Piccolo
because Postgres is continuously developing
and adding new features.
And I almost feel like Postgres
There's almost like an operating system in a way,
like the amount it does is kind of insane.
So it even has like a pub sub built in.
You can do that listen, notify.
- Oh, wow.
- But I'd like to do post GIS support.
Timescale DBs are really up and coming extension as well
for Postgres, for time series data.
But then a lot of the stuff I'm excited about
is like on the admin side.
So as I mentioned before, Piccolo Admin effectively
turns Pydantic models into UI.
So the next thing I want to add is you can basically
give it arbitrary Pydantic models
and it will render them as forms in the admin.
So if you have, for example, you want to send an email,
you'll just create send email model,
give it to Piccolo Admin and it'll generate a form.
So that's stuff I'm really excited about as well,
just to increase the utility of Piccolo Admin.
So a backend developer could build a functional app
for a business without actually writing any code.
That's kind of the dream,
is to build a really, really great admin.
- Yeah, yeah, these self-serve.
Like once you create the app and hand it off,
how far can people go before they have to hire
your design agency again or something like that?
The more that they can just run with it,
the better, I suspect.
- Yeah, it's such a huge benefit from Django,
like having that admin.
So I just wanna kind of see what I can do
with the latest technologies.
- Yeah, what's the story with Django and Piccolo?
Is there a reasonable way to click them together?
Or is it really not so much so far?
- I think you can.
I haven't really tried it much,
but it's very configurable Piccolo.
So, you know, and none of the names,
they deliberately don't clash with Django.
So Django has a settings.py,
Piccolo has a piccolo_conf.py.
And then Django has a migrations folder,
but Piccolo has piccolo_migrations.
So there's no clash there.
So in theory, they would work together,
but there's no like compatibility layer between the admins.
So you'd have like two separate admins or,
but I'd like to add support for Django
as it is an ASCII app,
and it's the originator of the ASCII standard.
And I still think Django is one of the great
kind of masterpieces in the framework world
that it's lasted so long
and it's still such a rock solid choice.
I would like to see what I can do there.
- Yeah, the closer those could be, I think, right?
Like this having the Genesis
and so many similar ideas to Django,
it seems like they should be somehow working together,
which is great.
- Yeah, it'd be cool.
- All right, well, Dan,
I think that might be about it for time that we got.
Let me ask you the final two questions that I always ask.
If you're gonna write some code,
you're gonna work on Piccolo,
what editor to use?
I think I caught a hint of it earlier, but go ahead.
- Yeah, VS Code all the way.
I was a huge Sublime Text and TextMate user,
and I was like, "I'll try out this VS Code,
"see what all the hype's about."
And after five minutes, I was never going back.
I just think it's such a great gift
to the world from Microsoft.
- Yeah. - It just gets better
and better as well.
- Yeah. - So yeah, love VS Code.
- Right on, and then notable PyPI package
you wanna give a shout out to?
- So I'm gonna cheat and pick two.
So Pydantic because I think it's such a nice
serialization library and I think it could almost
be in the standard library.
It feels so Pythonic and natural.
And then Starlette 'cause I think it's just a beautiful
like foundation for the ASCII world.
And I'd really encourage people to look at the code
to see the power of ASCII, how it is this like
turtles all the way down, everything's ASCII,
it is quite interesting.
So those would be my two shout outs.
- Yeah, very cool.
FastAPI is so popular now,
but FastAPI is kind of like an opinionated view
on top of Starlette to a large degree.
- Yeah, FastAPI is great as well.
- Yeah, well, I mean, it takes the two things you said,
PyDandec and Starlet, and puts them together
in like a nice way, which I think is pretty neat.
- Yeah, it's got great taste.
- Yeah, for sure.
- I'd just like to say one thing really quick,
and just thanks to everyone who's contributed to Piccolo,
'cause there's been people who've been contributing
for several years by this point,
and have put a lot of work in.
So yeah, just a shout out to anyone in the Piccolo community.
- Yeah, and final call, actually,
people are interested in using this.
It's good to go.
It's ready for production, web apps,
and all that good stuff.
- So I didn't really want to promote it
before it was ready.
And I use it in production, I have done for years,
and I am quite conservative about pushing stuff out there
unless I think it's solid.
And it's got hundreds unit tests.
It's solid.
I'm not saying there's not some edge case
I haven't discovered yet in some version of,
you know, Postgres or something,
but I use it in production every single day.
- Yeah.
Well, congrats on building a really cool Pythonic ORM.
I really like the way that you put things together
and yeah, it looks great.
It's got a lot of nice modern Python features
and people should definitely check it out.
- Cool, yeah, thanks a lot, Michael.
- You bet, see you later.
- Cheers, bye.
- Thanks everyone for being on the live stream as well.
see y'all.